The public story of selfishness tells us that we are – all of us – already far too selfish for our own good. It sounds compelling (self-flagellation usually does), but the reality may be somewhat different. Whatever the risks of excessive self-absorption, the real danger for most people is precisely the opposite: that they constantly put aside self-exploration and authentic inner development for the whims of so-called respectable opinion and socially sanctioned duties and commitments. The chief problem is not that we’re too selfish, it’s that we’re poor versions of what we might be because we’re not selfish enough.
 
As a result, most of us spend our lives seeing people we have nothing in common with; working at jobs that don’t make sense to us; sucking up to colleagues we hate; parroting opinions we’re suspicious of…and wind up, at the very end of our lives, wishing we had had the courage to live more authentically. 
 
A priority, while time allows, is therefore to acquire the skill of being politely but energetically more selfish. We should, from today, focus on what feels meaningful to us. We should ask ourselves what we will wish we had done when we are on our deathbeds – and do it now. 




We typically think of courage as a kind of absence: a lack of fear, an ignorance of danger, a heedlessness of shame or judgement. But just as often, courage comes from possessing certain ideas that can allow us to bypass our more timid instincts.  


 


Here are three brief lessons in courage – ideas to reflect on and return to, in order to bolster our confidence and shore up our self-belief.




We dream of being beyond mockery. We hope to avoid looking foolish. We try to be perfectly dignified. But no one is normal, and no one is perfect.




Accept that you are an idiot. Embrace that you will be an idiot. Understand that everyone else is an idiot too. This isn't an insult – it's liberation.




Every great achievement was monstrously hard. The successful just hide their struggles well. What looks effortless took countless drafts. Confidence means forgiving our first attempts.


 No matter how brilliant an idea might be, for it to be truly ‘useful’, we must also understand how to put it into practice. To help, The School of Life will be bringing you a new exercise every week… giving you the means of turning wisdom into reality. 
 
Underconfident people are not born, they’re made – and the more we find out about how they are made, the better our chances of reshaping ourselves in the direction of greater freedom and strength.
 
To generalise hugely but usefully, underconfidence tends to have its origins in a deficit of love. Probably someone, somewhere in the past – most likely a primary parent, or caregiver – didn’t give us the support, attention and kindness we needed. And so we developed patterns of timidity and fear, and became much less than we could have been.
 
Underconfidence, therefore, is merely a symptom of a much more serious, underlying issue: a lack of self-esteem. The route to greater confidence begins by assessing our own level of self-esteem – and identifying the negative patterns of thought and behaviour that are holding us back. 




Because our culture places such a high value on sociability, it can be deeply awkward to have to explain how much – at certain points –  we need to be alone.


We crave solitude because life among other people unfolds too quickly. The pace is relentless: the jokes, the insights, the excitements. There can sometimes be enough in five minutes of social life to take up an hour of analysis.


Unless we’ve spent some time apart, we can’t be who we would like to be around our fellow humans. We won’t have original opinions; we won’t have lively and authentic perspectives. We’ll be – in the wrong way – a bit like everyone else.








For many of us, the dominant emotions we experience day to day are those of dread and anxiety. They are what colour the background to many – far too many – of our thoughts. In our fragile moods, we are terrified of being sacked, of having done something wrong at work, of losing our relationship or of being accused and then humiliated by society.


Why do we feel like this? The real reason could sound surprising and initially almost random: self-hatred and, closely allied to this, pervasive shame. It isn’t that we are living in an exceptionally dangerous world, it is that we despise ourselves with rare and forensic intensity.